Workers explained (#489)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2021-08/workers-explained/index.md

### If a Worker is a Tentacle, does it count as a target for licensing?
Despite running the Tentacle software, Workers are viewed as an extension of the Octopus Server, therefore not counted as targets.  

Under the current licensing model, there's no limit to how many Worker Machines you can have.

## What is the Built-in Worker?
All Octopus instances come with a **Default Worker Pool** defined.  Any step that selects the **Default Worker Pool** executes on the Built-in Worker, which is the Octopus Server.  If, however, a Worker Machine is added to the **Default Worker Pool**, the Built-in Worker is no longer used.

## What can a Worker be used for?
Workers can be used with steps that don't _need_ to be executed on a target.  The most common use cases are:

- Database deployments 
- API or Web service calls
- Running scripts
- Kubernetes deployments

### Database deployments
Deploying database updates only requires a connection string to the database server, and database you're working with.  Workers help perform database deployments without having to install additional software on the database server.

### API or Web service calls

> Workers are perfect for calling APIs or a Web service that don’t need a target to run on. Examples include:

Reviewer: @twerthi I flipped this sentence around and included some bullet points. Please let me know if my edits have changed the intended meaning at all. Thanks.

![](octopus-worker-k8s-deploy.png)

#### Referenced package ordering
Package reference ordering also affects Worker selection.  For example, if you have two steps that reference the same packages in the same order, Octopus runs both steps on the same Worker.

![](octopus-reference-package1.png)

However, if the ordering of the packages is different, Octopus selects different Workers for each step.

![](octopus-reference-package2.png)

#### Manual intervention
When a [Manual Intervention](https://octopus.com/docs/projects/built-in-step-templates/manual-intervention-and-approvals) step is encountered, it's removed from the task queue.  After the intervention has been acted on, the task is added back into the queue which forces Worker selection to occur again.

## I'm using Octopus Cloud, how do Dynamic Workers work?
Octopus Deploy maintains a set of Workers (VMs) that you can use on demand as Dynamic Workers.  These Workers are available in the following pools:

- Default Worker Pool (Windows Server 2016)
- Hosted Windows (Windows Server 2019`*`)
- Hosted Ubuntu (Ubuntu 18.04`*`)

`*` Pool can use the Execution Containers feature.

> Each cloud instance can lease one Worker per pool and is exclusive to that cloud instance.  After the lease expires, the Worker is destroyed (see [this kb article](https://help.octopus.com/t/how-do-dynamic-workers-work-in-octopus-cloud/25228/2) for time expiration.)  After being destroyed, a new Worker is provisioned and added to the pool of available Workers for cloud instances to lease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each cloud instance can lease one Worker per pool and is exclusive to that cloud instance.  After the lease expires, the Worker is destroyed (see [this article about dynamic workers](https://help.octopus.com/t/how-do-dynamic-workers-work-in-octopus-cloud/25228/2) for time expiration.)  After being destroyed, a new Worker is provisioned and added to the pool of available Workers for cloud instances to lease.
```

> Each cloud instance can lease one Worker per pool and is exclusive to that cloud instance.  After the lease expires, the Worker is destroyed (see [this article about Dynamic Workers](https://help.octopus.com/t/how-do-dynamic-workers-work-in-octopus-cloud/25228/2) for time expiration.)  After being destroyed, a new Worker is provisioned and added to the pool of available Workers for cloud instances to lease.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each cloud instance can lease one Worker per pool, that's exclusive to that cloud instance.  After the lease expires, the Worker is destroyed (see [this article about Dynamic Workers](https://help.octopus.com/t/how-do-dynamic-workers-work-in-octopus-cloud/25228/2) for time expiration.)  After being destroyed, a new Worker is provisioned and added to the pool of available Workers for cloud instances to lease.
```

---
title: Workers explained
description: Learn about Workers, how they operate and how they help with tasks executing directly on the server.
author: shawn.sesna@octopus.com
visibility: public
published: 2021-08-23-1400
metaImage: blogimage-demystifying-workers_2021.png
bannerImage: blogimage-demystifying-workers_2021.png

> bannerImageAlt: four workmen in hardhats in blue uniforms, one holding an octopus deploy branded laptop 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
bannerImageAlt: four people in hardhats in blue uniforms, one holding an octopus deploy branded laptop 
```

isFeatured: false
tags:
 - DevOps
 - Workers
---

In the early days of Octopus Deploy, as the product evolved, increasing demands were being made on the server it was installed on.  Any step that didn't execute directly on a [target](https://octopus.com/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets) was executed on the server itself.  

> To address the growing list of tasks executing directly on the server, Octopus came up with the concept of Workers.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address the growing list of tasks executing directly on the server, we created the concept of Workers.  
```
